approved/report-cpu-features-to-placement.rst ../approved/report-cpu-features-as-traits.rst
approved/abort-live-migration-in-queued-status.rst ../implemented/abort-live-migration-in-queued-status.rst
approved/add-consumer-generation.rst ../implemented/add-consumer-generation.rst
approved/add-extra-specs-to-flavor-list.rst ../implemented/add-extra-specs-to-flavor-list.rst
approved/add-host-to-instance-action-events.rst ../implemented/add-host-to-instance-action-events.rst
approved/add-zvm-driver-rocky.rst ../implemented/add-zvm-driver-rocky.rst
approved/alloc-candidates-member-of.rst ../implemented/alloc-candidates-member-of.rst
approved/allow-reserved-equal-total-inventory.rst ../implemented/allow-reserved-equal-total-inventory.rst
approved/cell-disable.rst ../implemented/cell-disable.rst
approved/complex-anti-affinity-policies.rst ../implemented/complex-anti-affinity-policies.rst
approved/convert-consoles-to-objects.rst ../implemented/convert-consoles-to-objects.rst
approved/enhanced-kvm-storage-qos.rst ../implemented/enhanced-kvm-storage-qos.rst
approved/generation-from-create-provider.rst ../implemented/generation-from-create-provider.rst
approved/glance-image-traits.rst ../implemented/glance-image-traits.rst
approved/granular-resource-requests.rst ../implemented/granular-resource-requests.rst
approved/libvirt-file-backed-memory.rst ../implemented/libvirt-file-backed-memory.rst
approved/libvirt-virtio-set-queue-sizes.rst ../implemented/libvirt-virtio-set-queue-sizes.rst
approved/nested-resource-providers-allocation-candidates.rst ../implemented/nested-resource-providers-allocation-candidates.rst
approved/neutron-new-port-binding-api.rst ../implemented/neutron-new-port-binding-api.rst
approved/nova-validate-certificates.rst ../implemented/nova-validate-certificates.rst
approved/numa-aware-vswitches.rst ../implemented/numa-aware-vswitches.rst
approved/optional-placement-database.rst ../implemented/optional-placement-database.rst
approved/overhead-pin-set.rst ../implemented/overhead-pin-set.rst
approved/placement-aggregate-generation.rst ../implemented/placement-aggregate-generation.rst
approved/placement-api-error-handling.rst ../implemented/placement-api-error-handling.rst
approved/placement-forbidden-traits.rst ../implemented/placement-forbidden-traits.rst
approved/placement-mirror-host-aggregates.rst ../implemented/placement-mirror-host-aggregates.rst
approved/placement-req-filter.rst ../implemented/placement-req-filter.rst
approved/placement-return-all-resources.rst ../implemented/placement-return-all-resources.rst
approved/report-cpu-features-as-traits.rst ../implemented/report-cpu-features-as-traits.rst
approved/sriov-trusted-vfs.rst ../implemented/sriov-trusted-vfs.rst
approved/traits-on-list-resource-providers.rst ../implemented/traits-on-list-resource-providers.rst
approved/update-provider-tree.rst ../implemented/update-provider-tree.rst
